[LWG 7 2024-06] P0843R14 inplace_vector (#7115)
cplusplus/draft: source/containers.tex

\end{codeblock}
\end{itemdescr}

\rSec2[inplace.vector]{Class template \tcode{inplace_vector}}

\rSec3[inplace.vector.overview]{Overview}

\pnum
\indexlibraryglobal{inplace_vector}%
An \tcode{inplace_vector} is a contiguous container.
Its capacity is fixed and
its elements are stored within the \tcode{inplace_vector} object itself.

\pnum
An \tcode{inplace_vector} meets all of the requirements
of a container\iref{container.reqmts},
of a reversible container\iref{container.rev.reqmts},
of a contiguous container, and
of a sequence container,
including most of the optional sequence container requirements\iref{sequence.reqmts}.
The exceptions are the
\tcode{push_front},
\tcode{prepend_range},
\tcode{pop_front}, and
\tcode{emplace_front}
member functions, which are not provided.
Descriptions are provided here only
for operations on \tcode{inplace_vector} that
are not described in one of these tables or
for operations where there is additional semantic information.

\pnum
For any \tcode{N},
\tcode{inplace_vector<T, N>::iterator} and
\tcode{inplace_vector<T, N>::const_iterator}

> meet the constexpr iterator requirements.

Author: normative change, please forward to LWG

> meet the constexpr iterator requirements.

Reviewer: This (matching [array] and [vector]) is the wording LEWG asked for.

> That said, what's T?

As I said, T and N are the template arguments to `inplace_vector` (which is an injected-class-name in this context). Cf. [array] and [vector].

> meet the constexpr iterator requirements.

Author: Please understand - our job as editors is to apply the wording given to us, and this makes sense - it's what LWG voted in. We can fix obvious errors and oversights (as I have), but what your asking for goes beyond that.

> meet the constexpr iterator requirements.

Reviewer 2: LWG spent a lot of time on that sentence, please don't change it editorially.

\pnum

> %FIXME: Should this instead say something like:
> %FIXME:     "For any \tcode{N} such that \tcode{N > 0} is \tcode{true}, ..."?
> %FIXME: Same for similar expressions added in P0843R14?
> For any \tcode{N > 0},
> if \tcode{is_trivial_v<T>} is \tcode{false}, then
> no \tcode{inplace_vector<T, N>} member functions
> are usable in constant expressions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If \tcode{is_trivial_v<T>} is \tcode{false}, then
no member functions of \tcode{inplace_vector}
are usable in constant expressions.
```

Here and above, there's no need to say "for all N" nor "for all T", because we're already within the context of `inplace_vector`, i.e., the injected-class-name of some _particular_ specialization of `inplace_vector`, with a _particular_ `T` and `N`.

Note to anyone who cares: This used to say something to the effect of "no non-static member functions of", but LWG discussion in St Louis seems to have come down on the side of "who cares if e.g. `capacity` is constexpr-friendly, when `size` itself isn't," and so "no member functions [period]" is indeed what was polled and approved.

Reviewer 3: I guess it's more appropriate to say
> no member functions of `inplace_vector` are <ins>**guaranteed to be**</ins> usable in constant expressions

or
> it is unspecified any member function of `inplace_vector` is usable in constant expressions

But this seemingly needs an LWG issue, and the sentence will be dropped if [P3074](https://wg21.link/p3074) lands.

Reviewer: By my recollection, LEWG explicitly discussed the fact that library vendors have the freedom to add `noexcept` _but not to add `constexpr`_, and we were explciitly deciding to _forbid_ library vendors from making any of these functions constexpr-friendly in those cases.

That was certainly given as a rationale for why `iterator` is unconditionally constexpr-friendly: at least some of us were under the impression that if we had said "Under such-and-such conditions `iterator` does _not_ meet the constexpr iterator requirements," then we would be forcing library vendors to invent an iterator type that was "basically `T*` but constexpr-unfriendly," just for that purpose.

However, if (my recollection of) our impression was wrong — if library vendors actually _do_ have the freedom to make `inplace_vector` "more constexpr than strictly necessary" — well, IMHO that wouldn't be a bad outcome at all. :)

Author: I've left this as is - this wording (e.g. the use of `inplace_vector<T, N>`) is used throughout this section; to change it only here would be inconsistent, while changing it elsewhere requires additional wording.

Reviewer 2: > Here and above, there's no need to say "for all N" nor "for all T",

But it _doesn't_ say for all N, it says for N > 0.

Reviewer 3: This is being moot as the restriction itself is being removed by [P3074](https://wg21.link/p3074).

\pnum

> Any member function of \tcode{inplace_vector<T, N>} that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any call to a member function of \tcode{inplace_vector} that
```

Drop `<T, N>` per above. Also, I think we're talking about the _behavior of a call_ to the function, not a property of the function itself.

Author: I think you're right that we're talking about the behavior of a call to the function, but maybe taking about "invoking" the function would be better? Please forward to LWG.

As for the `<T, N>`, leaving in for consistency.

would cause the size to exceed \tcode{N}
throws an exception of type \tcode{bad_alloc}.

\pnum
Let \tcode{IV} denote a specialization of \tcode{inplace_vector<T, N>}.
If \tcode{N} is zero, then
\tcode{IV} is both trivial and empty.
Otherwise:
\begin{itemize}
\item
If \tcode{is_trivially_copy_constructible_v<T>} is \tcode{true}, then
\tcode{IV} has a trivial copy constructor.
\item
If \tcode{is_trivially_move_constructible_v<T>} is \tcode{true}, then
\tcode{IV} has a trivial move constructor.
\item
If \tcode{is_trivially_destructible_v<T>} is \tcode{true}, then:
  \begin{itemize}
  \item
  \tcode{IV} has a trivial destructor,
  \item
  if
\begin{codeblock}
  is_trivially_copy_constructible_v<T> && is_trivially_copy_assignable_v<T>
\end{codeblock}
  is \tcode{true}, then

>   \tcode{IV} has a trivial copy assignment operator,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  \tcode{IV} has a trivial copy assignment operator, and
```
(Assuming I've parsed the English correctly: this `itemize` is a list of three things, and the penultimate thing should end with `, and`. Compare other places that we do lists of things.)

Author: Thanks - fixed by making the sub-list statements as well.

    constexpr const_reverse_iterator rbegin()  const noexcept;
    constexpr reverse_iterator       rend()          noexcept;
    constexpr const_reverse_iterator rend()    const noexcept;

    constexpr const_iterator         cbegin()  const noexcept;
    constexpr const_iterator         cend()    const noexcept;
    constexpr const_reverse_iterator crbegin() const noexcept;
    constexpr const_reverse_iterator crend()   const noexcept;

    // \ref{inplace.vector.capacity} size/capacity
    constexpr bool empty() const noexcept;
    constexpr size_type size() const noexcept;
    static constexpr size_type max_size() noexcept;
    static constexpr size_type capacity() noexcept;
    constexpr void resize(size_type sz);                                    // freestanding-deleted
    constexpr void resize(size_type sz, const T& c);                        // freestanding-deleted
    static constexpr void reserve(size_type n);                             // freestanding-deleted
    static constexpr void shrink_to_fit() noexcept;

    // element access
    constexpr reference       operator[](size_type n);
    constexpr const_reference operator[](size_type n) const;

>     constexpr const_reference at(size_type n) const;                        // freestanding-deleted
>     constexpr reference       at(size_type n);                              // freestanding-deleted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    constexpr reference       at(size_type n);                              // freestanding-deleted
    constexpr const_reference at(size_type n) const;                        // freestanding-deleted
```

For consistency of order with all of its neighbors.

Author: fixed

    constexpr iterator insert(const_iterator position, size_type n,         // freestanding-deleted
                              const T& x);
    template<class InputIterator>
      constexpr iterator insert(const_iterator position,                    // freestanding-deleted
                                InputIterator first, InputIterator last);
    template<@\exposconcept{container-compatible-range}@<T> R>
      constexpr iterator insert_range(const_iterator position, R&& rg);     // freestanding-deleted
    constexpr iterator insert(const_iterator position,                      // freestanding-deleted
                              initializer_list<T> il);
    constexpr iterator erase(const_iterator position);
    constexpr iterator erase(const_iterator first, const_iterator last);
    constexpr void swap(inplace_vector& x)
      noexcept(N == 0 || (is_nothrow_swappable_v<T> &&
                          is_nothrow_move_constructible_v<T>));
    constexpr void clear() noexcept;

    constexpr friend bool operator==(const inplace_vector& x,
                                     const inplace_vector& y);

>     constexpr friend synth-three-way-result<T>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    constexpr friend @\exposid{synth-three-way-result}@<T>
```
Also, currently this will make the whole `inplace_vector<T, N>` ill-formed when `synth-three-way-result<T>` is ill-formed (see LWG4071), but an LWG issue seems needed.

Author: Thanks! fixed

Looking thru other occurrences of synth-three-way-result in containers.tex, some use `\exposid`, but most use `\placeholder`. They should all be `\exposid` right?

Reviewer 3: Not sure why `\placeholder` was used in so many places. I think it's better to use `\exposid` for _`synth-three-way-result`_, see https://github.com/cplusplus/draft/wiki/Specification-Style-Guidelines#formatting.

Author: thanks - opened #7126; resolving here

\begin{itemdecl}
template<class InputIterator>
  constexpr inplace_vector(InputIterator first, InputIterator last);
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
\effects
Constructs an \tcode{inplace_vector} equal to the range \range{first}{last}.

\pnum
\complexity
Linear in \tcode{distance(first, last)}.
\end{itemdescr}

\indexlibraryctor{inplace_vector}
\begin{itemdecl}
template<@\exposconcept{container-compatible-range}@<T> R>
  constexpr inplace_vector(from_range_t, R&& rg);
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
\effects
Constructs an \tcode{inplace_vector} object with
the elements of the range \tcode{rg}.

\pnum
\complexity
Linear in \tcode{ranges::distance(rg)}.
\end{itemdescr}

\rSec3[inplace.vector.capacity]{Size and capacity}

\indexlibrarymember{capacity}{inplace_vector}%
\indexlibrarymember{max_size}{inplace_vector}%
\begin{itemdecl}
static constexpr size_type capacity() noexcept;
static constexpr size_type max_size() noexcept;
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
\returns
\tcode{N}.
\end{itemdescr}

\indexlibrarymember{resize}{inplace_vector}%
\begin{itemdecl}
constexpr void resize(size_type sz);
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
\expects

> \tcode{T} is \oldconcept{DefaultInsertable} into \tcode{*this}.

Reviewer: Pre-existing: This should say
```
\tcode{T} is \oldconcept{DefaultInsertable} into \tcode{inplace_vector}.
```
(`*this` is not a container type; it's an object.) But we have the incorrect "into `*this`" wording already appearing in [vector] and [deque], so the change would have to be made there too.

(Ditto on line 9468.)

Author: please open a separate issue for this.
resolving to reduce "noise".

Reviewer 4: I filed #7133 to track this.

\pnum
\effects

> %FIXME: Should "is \tcode{true}" be appended here?

Reviewer: FWIW, I don't think so. But house style already says "if X is true" in a lot of places where I-and-logic would just say "if X", so I could be wrong about the preferred style.

Author: leaving FIXME in for now and resolving to reduce "noise".

If \tcode{sz < size()},
erases the last \tcode{size() - sz} elements from the sequence.
Otherwise,
appends \tcode{sz - size()} default-inserted elements to the sequence.

\pnum
\remarks

> If an exception is thrown, there are no effects on \tcode{*this}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If an exception is thrown, there are no effects.
```

Author: this is a normative change, please forward to LWG.
resolving here to reduce "noise"

\end{itemdescr}

\indexlibrarymember{resize}{inplace_vector}%
\begin{itemdecl}
constexpr void resize(size_type sz, const T& c);
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
\expects

> \tcode{T} is \oldconcept{CopyInsertable} into \tcode{*this}.

Reviewer: Pre-existing: This should say
```
\tcode{T} is \oldconcept{CopyInsertable} into \tcode{inplace_vector}.
```
(`*this` is not a container type; it's an object.) But we have the incorrect "into `*this`" wording already appearing in [vector] and [deque], so the change would have to be made there too.

Author: please open a separate issue for this.
resolving to reduce "noise".

\pnum
\effects
%FIXME: Should "is \tcode{true}" be appended here?
If \tcode{sz < size()},
erases the last \tcode{size() - sz} elements from the sequence.
Otherwise,
appends \tcode{sz - size()} copies of \tcode{c} to the sequence.

\pnum
\remarks

> If an exception is thrown, there are no effects on \tcode{*this}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If an exception is thrown, there are no effects.
```

Author: this is a normative change, please forward to LWG.
resolving here to reduce "noise"

\end{itemdescr}

\rSec3[inplace.vector.data]{Data}

\indexlibrarymember{data}{inplace_vector}%
\begin{itemdecl}
constexpr       T* data()       noexcept;
constexpr const T* data() const noexcept;
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
\returns

> A pointer such that \range{data()}{data() + size()} is a valid range.
> For a non-empty \tcode{inplace_vector},
> %FIXME: Should "is \tcode{true}" be appended here?
> \tcode{data() == addressof(front())}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A pointer such that \range{data()}{data() + size()} is a valid range. For a
non-empty \tcode{inplace_vector}, \tcode{data() == addressof(front())} is \keyword{true}.
```

Yes. Cf. [array] and [vector].

Author: fixed

template<class InputIterator>
  constexpr iterator insert(const_iterator position, InputIterator first, InputIterator last);
template<@\exposconcept{container-compatible-range}@<T> R>
  constexpr iterator insert_range(const_iterator position, R&& rg);
constexpr iterator insert(const_iterator position, initializer_list<T> il);

template<class... Args>
  constexpr iterator emplace(const_iterator position, Args&&... args);
template<@\exposconcept{container-compatible-range}@<T> R>
  constexpr void append_range(R&& rg);
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
Let $n$ be value of \tcode{size()} before this call for
the \tcode{append_range} overload, and
\tcode{distance(begin, position)} otherwise.

\pnum
\complexity
Linear in the number of elements inserted plus
the distance to the end of the vector.

\pnum
\remarks
If an exception is thrown other than by the
copy constructor,
move constructor,
assignment operator, or
move assignment operator
of \tcode{T} or by
any \tcode{InputIterator} operation,
there are no effects.
Otherwise,
if an exception is thrown, then
$\tcode{size()} \ge n$ and
%FIXME: Is "begin() + [0, n)" a valid range?

> elements in the range \tcode{begin() + \range{0}{$n$}} are not modified.

Author: While this does seem to be the intent, this feels like a normative change. @tkoeppe what do you think?

> elements in the range \tcode{begin() + \range{0}{$n$}} are not modified.

Reviewer 5: `begin() + [0, n)` is fine as is: https://timsong-cpp.github.io/cppwp/iterator.requirements.general#11

> elements in the range \tcode{begin() + \range{0}{$n$}} are not modified.

Author: Ok thanks - I reverted my separate fix and removed the FIXMEs.

\end{itemdescr}

\indexlibrarymember{push_back}{inplace_vector}%
\indexlibrarymember{emplace_back}{inplace_vector}%
\begin{itemdecl}
constexpr reference push_back(const T& x);
constexpr reference push_back(T&& x);
template<class... Args>
  constexpr reference emplace_back(Args&&... args);
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
\returns
\tcode{back()}.

\pnum
\throws
\tcode{bad_alloc} or
any exception thrown by initialization of inserted element.

\pnum
\complexity
Constant.

\pnum
\remarks
If an exception is thrown there are no effects on \tcode{*this}.
\end{itemdescr}

\indexlibrarymember{try_emplace_back}{inplace_vector}%
\indexlibrarymember{try_push_back}{inplace_vector}%
\begin{itemdecl}
template<class... Args>
  constexpr pointer try_emplace_back(Args&&... args);
constexpr pointer try_push_back(const T& x);
constexpr pointer try_push_back(T&& x);
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
Let \tcode{vals} denote a pack:
\begin{itemize}
\item \tcode{std::forward<Args>(args)...} for the first overload,
\item \tcode{x} for the second overload,
\item \tcode{set::move(x)} for the third overload.
\end{itemize}

\pnum
\expects
\tcode{T} is \oldconcept{EmplaceConstructible}

> into \tcode{*this} from \tcode{vals...}.

Reviewer: This is editorial, _not_ normative. But I don't mind opening a separate editorial PR to fix this throughout, after this one is merged.

> into \tcode{*this} from \tcode{vals...}.

Reviewer 2: _EmplaceConstructible_ into `*this` is also normatively meaningless, we should have spotted that in the review. It should be phrased in terms of a type, not an object.

> into \tcode{*this} from \tcode{vals...}.

Reviewer 2: And changing T to value_type is not normative, they're the same thing.

So I think fixing this editorially is fine. The first part of the change is not a normative change, and the second part fixes meaningless wording to be correct and consistent with the intent.

\pnum
\effects
If \tcode{size() < capacity()} is \tcode{true},
appends an object of type \tcode{T}
direct-non-list-initialized with \tcode{vals...}.
Otherwise, there are no effects.

\pnum
\returns
\keyword{nullptr} if \tcode{size() == capacity()} is \tcode{true},
otherwise \tcode{addressof(back())}.

\pnum
\throws
Nothing unless an exception is thrown by initialization of inserted element.

\pnum
\complexity
Constant.

\pnum
\remarks
If an exception is thrown there are no effects on \tcode{*this}.
\end{itemdescr}

\indexlibrarymember{try_append_range}{inplace_vector}%
\begin{itemdecl}
template<@\exposconcept{container-compatible-range}@<T> R>
  constexpr ranges::borrowed_iterator_t<R> try_append_range(R&& rg);
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
\expects
\tcode{T} is \oldconcept{EmplaceConstructible}

> from \tcode{*ranges::begin(rg)} into \tcode{*this}.

Author: please forward to LWG

> from \tcode{*ranges::begin(rg)} into \tcode{*this}.

Reviewer 2: The suggestion is correct

> from \tcode{*ranges::begin(rg)} into \tcode{*this}.

Reviewer 4: Thanks, this looks like a reasonable fix.

\pnum
\effects
Appends copies of initial elements in \tcode{rg} before \tcode{end()},
until all elements are inserted or \tcode{size() == capacity()} is \tcode{true}.
Each iterator in the range \tcode{rg} is dereferenced at most once.

\pnum
\returns

> %FIXME: Should this be "An iterator past the last inserted element of rg."?
> Iterator past last inserted element of \tcode{rg}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An iterator that points one past the copy of the last element inserted into `*this`, or `end()` if `rg` is empty.
```

Cf. the wording for [`a.insert(p, i, j)`](https://eel.is/c++draft/sequence.reqmts#38) and [`a.insert_range(p, rg)`](https://eel.is/c++draft/sequence.reqmts#42).

Reviewer: Here, below (line 9774), and also in the Complexity element (line 9764), I wonder if we should say "the _successfully_ inserted element[s]" instead of just "the inserted element[s]."

Author: please forward to LWG.

\pnum
\complexity
Linear in the number of elements inserted.

\pnum
\remarks
Let $n$ be the value of \tcode{size()} prior to this call.

> If an exception is thrown after insertion of $k$ elements, then
> \tcode{size()} equals $n + k$,
> %FIXME: Are these valid ranges?
> elements in the range \tcode{begin() + \range{0}{$n$}} are not modified, and
> elements in the range \tcode{begin() + \range{$n$}{$n + k$}} correspond to
> the inserted elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If an exception is thrown after the insertion of $k$ elements, then
\tcode{size()} equals $n + k$,
the elements in the range \tcode{[begin(), begin() + n)} are not modified,
and the elements in the range \tcode{[begin() + n, begin() + n + k)} are
copies of the inserted elements.
```

(Perhaps "after the insertion of the $k$th element", or "during the insertion of the $k+1$th element" since that's what we really mean AFAICT?)

Author: "the" added.

As for the ranges, I think your rewrite is what was intended (except that the math font and `\range` should be kept), but can we be sure? See same issue above.

As for the wording changes, they're normative - please forward to LWG.

\end{itemdescr}

\indexlibrarymember{unchecked_emplace_back}{inplace_vector}%
\begin{itemdecl}
template<class... Args>

>   constexpr reference unchecked_emplace_back(Args&&... x);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  constexpr reference unchecked_emplace_back(Args&&... args);
```

Author: fixed

\begin{itemdecl}
constexpr reference unchecked_push_back(const T& x);
constexpr reference unchecked_push_back(T&& x);
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
\expects
\tcode{size() < capacity()} is \tcode{true}.

\pnum
\effects
Equivalent to:
\tcode{return *try_push_back(std::forward<decltype(x)>(x));}
\end{itemdescr}

\indexlibrarymember{reserve}{inplace_vector}%
\begin{itemdecl}
static constexpr void reserve(size_type n);
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
\effects
None.

\pnum
\throws
\tcode{bad_alloc} if \tcode{n > capacity()} is \tcode{true}.
\end{itemdescr}

\indexlibrarymember{shrink_to_fit}{inplace_vector}%
\begin{itemdecl}
static constexpr void shrink_to_fit() noexcept;
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
\effects
None.
\end{itemdescr}

\indexlibrarymember{erase}{inplace_vector}%
\indexlibrarymember{pop_back}{inplace_vector}%
\begin{itemdecl}
constexpr iterator erase(const_iterator position);
constexpr iterator erase(const_iterator first, const_iterator last);
constexpr void pop_back();
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
\effects
Invalidates iterators and references at or after the point of the erase.

\pnum
\throws
Nothing unless an exception is thrown by

> the assignment operator or move assignment operator of \tcode{T}.

Reviewer: "The move assignment operator," said Ford Prefect quietly, "is also an assignment operator."

If this is trying to hint that we might use an assignment operator other than the move-assignment operator (e.g. if the only `operator=` available is `void operator=(std::any)`, [like this](https://godbolt.org/z/TE63YPoEz)) — well, that's true, but I still think there's no sense in mentioning a subset of assignment operators (the move assignment operators) here.

```suggestion
the assignment operator of \tcode{T}.
```

Cf. the Complexity element, which gets it right, in my book.

Author: this is a normative change, please forward to LWG.
resolving here to reduce "noise".

Reviewer 2: It should either be "the copy assignment operator or move assignment operator" or "**an** assignment operator", but the approved wording and the suggested change are both bad.

Reviewer 3: See also #3208. It was very unfortunate that the bad wording got copied.

I think "the copy assignment operator or move assignment operator" is still defective, because `T` can be copy/move-assigned by an assignment operator which is a template when the real copy/move assignment operator is not selected.

Reviewer 4: @jwakely Could we turn this, and #3208, into an LWG issue?

Reviewer 2: https://cplusplus.github.io/LWG/issue4123

Reviewer 4: Thanks!

\pnum
\complexity
The destructor of \tcode{T} is called the number of times
equal to the number of the elements erased, but
the assignment operator of \tcode{T} is called the number of times
equal to the number of elements after the erased elements.
\end{itemdescr}

\rSec3[inplace.vector.erasure]{Erasure}

\indexlibrarymember{erase}{inplace_vector}%
\begin{itemdecl}
template<class T, size_t N, class U = T>
  constexpr size_t erase(inplace_vector<T, N>& c, const U& value);
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
\effects
Equivalent to:
\begin{codeblock}
auto it = remove(c.begin(), c.end(), value);
auto r = distance(it, c.end());
c.erase(it, c.end());
return r;
\end{codeblock}
\end{itemdescr}

\indexlibrarymember{erase_if}{inplace_vector}%
\begin{itemdecl}

> template<class T, size_t, class Predicate>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
template<class T, size_t N, class Predicate>
```

Author: fixed
